+++
lastmod = 2021-03-27T15:54:44Z
title = "Garden SRE"
tags = ['Gardening', 'SRE']
+++

There's a saying that _if all you have is a hammer, everything looks like a
nail_; I tend to take the SRE approach to everything, including gardening, so
here are some thoughts about gardening. My context is that we have a relatively
large garden, and I don't like gardening; if you have a more manageable garden
or you like gardening, you might not find this helpful.

## Reduce your toil

A lot of my advice is aimed at reducing toil to keep the overall work to a
manageable level; I'm defining toil as _work that does not bring long-term
value_. You can't remove toil entirely from gardening, but you can reduce it.

### Cutting grass

Sitting on a ride-on mower to cut grass is a waste of time. Back in 2013 my wife
convinced me that we should buy a [Husqvarna
Automower](https://www.husqvarna.com/ie/products/robotic-lawn-mowers/), and I'm
delighted that she did. We call it Robosheep :) I spend about 30 minutes on
maintenance every 3 weeks, swapping or rotating Robosheep's blades and cleaning
away any built up grass. Because Robosheep can't get right up to the edge - its
wheels would go over the edge and it would get stuck - I also need to cut the
edges, which takes about 30-40 minutes every 2 weeks with the cheapest push
mower I could buy. In contrast it would take about 4 hours every 10 days to cut
the lawn with a ride-on mower, and that's if the weather cooperates - in reality
I would be mowing-oncall from May-September. We did have some problems with
Robosheep in 2019 - that's how I know how much time it takes to cut our lawn
with a ride-on mower - but happily our local Husqvarna dealer [Coughlan Garden
Equipment](https://www.cgeltd.ie/) chased Husqvarna Ireland until they fixed it.

### Weed control

For the first few months we tried keeping weeds under control using a dutch hoe;
this is exhausting, takes a long time, and in the long-term is counterproductive
because it loosens up the soil making it easier for weeds to take root.

By the end of the first summer I had bought a knapsack sprayer and was spraying
with weedkiller. This takes far less effort and time, making it much more
sustainable, and lets the ground harden over time making it harder for weeds to
grow. I recommend a 12 litre or smaller knapsack sprayer; it's tempting to buy a
bigger one, but they are not ergonomic or comfortable, and I have only
completely filled my 20 litre sprayer once - it's just too heavy to use.

Prevention is better than cure for weed control: in my experience you're far
better of spraying frequently to kill small weeds than spraying infrequently to
kill big weeds - big weeds take a lot longer to die and it's harder to be
careful with the spray because big weeds are taller. When you spray more
frequently each session takes a lot less time, so it's probably a similar amount
of effort whether you spray frequently or infrequently. Sadly spraying is very
weather-dependent, so you might not be able to spray for many weeks - in the
summer of 2020 there were 7 consecutive weeks where I couldn't spray because of
the weather :(

As Rage Against The Machine sang, [Know Your
Enemy](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JukTvlrh-Wk). Many weeds will respond to
a generic weedkiller like Round Up, but some will not. Our garden has a lot of
Willowherb, which is horribly invasive, grows rapidly, and is hurt but not
killed by Round Up. Without active management Willowherb would cover our garden
in a summer or less :( I asked my local agricultural supplier for advice and
they recommended Grazon, which is much more effective on Willowherb than Round
Up. You do have to be more careful with Grazon than Round Up - Round Up won't do
much damage to shrubs, but Grazon will, so I have to be more careful spraying
with it. I mix Grazon and Clearall 360 (also recommended by my agricultural
supplier) and spray that on all the weeds because that is much more manageable
than spraying twice with different weedkillers.

When weeds get out of control sometimes it's better to take a different
approach. For tall weeds I recommend using a strimmer to cut them at the base,
then collect the stems and dump them - your garden will look better faster, and
spraying tall weeds is difficult to do without the spray drifting.

A couple of years ago I tried organic weedkiller but sadly I can't recommend it.
Organic weedkiller is acid of some sort (typically acetic acid, which is also
used in vinegar) and it works by burning the leaves of the weeds. This greatly
changes how you apply it compared to non-organic weedkiller: you need to drench
the weeds because a leaf that doesn't have acid on it is a leaf that won't be
burned. This is particularly problematic for taller weeds, where higher leaves
will shelter lower leaves. One advantage of organic weedkiller is that the
impact is visible after about 4 days, so it's easy to tell if you missed an
area. Sadly organic weedkiller is very expensive compared to non-organic
weedkiller:

- TL;DR: organic weedkiller costs about 4 times as much as non-organic
  weedkiller.
- I generally need 3 knapsacks of non-organic weedkiller for my garden, so about
  36 litres. 5 litres of Clearall 360 costs €38 and gives me over 200 litres of
  spray. 1 litre of Grazon costs €65 and gives me 165 litres of spray. For €103
  I will spray 4, maybe 5 times, and have enough Clearall 360 left for another
  full spray - so a single spray costs about €26.
- It usually took 5-6 knapsacks of organic weedkiller because you have to spray
  so much more of the acid on everything. 5 litres of Irish Organic Weed Off
  costs €59, or €39 if I take advantage of the _buy 2 get 1 free_ offer that's
  usually available. In my experience there's no point in diluting it more than
  4:1 because it doesn't have much impact when it's more dilute, so 5 litres
  gives me 25 litres of spray. I need 60-70 litres of spray, so I need 12-15
  litres of organic weedkiller, so spraying once costs €100-€118 :(

## Never lose ground

Imagine you can deal with one quarter of your garden each weekend; it's very
tempting to do one quarter each weekend for four weekends, but it's my
experience that on the fifth weekend you'll find that the first quarter is bad
again and takes close to as much effort as it did first time round :( We've
learned that it's better to maintain the ground you've gained, even though it
delays eventual completion; you'll completely deal with your garden in five-six
weeks rather than four, but your garden will be in a much better state after six
weeks when you adopt the _never lose ground_ attitude than if you try to finish
in four weeks.

## Perfect is the enemy of good

This is generally true in life, but it's particularly true for gardening.
Imagine if you could somehow remove every single weed in your garden? That would
take an enormous amount of time, and although it would be satisfying today,
tomorrow new weeds would already be growing :( It's tempting to aim for
perfection but it's not achievable or maintainable.

## Little and often

Doing 8 hours of gardening in a day is exhausting, and I would dread having to
spend that long gardening once a month, so instead I try to do smaller amounts
of work more frequently so that it's less intrusive.
