I needed to write a static web page in work recently, so I decided to use
Markdown, because writing HTML is time-consuming and unproductive.  I was
writing a reasonably large page, so I wanted folding, which the syntax
highlighting I've been using for years didn't support.  I wrote some simple
folding support to create nested folds at headers, and also reconfigured vim to
recognise bulleted lists so that reformatting with `gq` doesn't destroy lists.

Save this as `~/.vim/plugin/markdown-folding.vim` - it will be automatically
loaded every time you start vim, but it won't do anything by itself.

    " vim: set filetype=vim :
    if has("eval")
      function! MarkdownFolding(lnum)
        " Define nested folds based on the length of the header.
        let l:line = getline(a:lnum)
        let l:matches = matchlist(l:line, '^\(#\+\)')
        if len(l:matches) == 0
          return '='
        endif
        let l:length = strlen(l:matches[1])
        if l:length <= 2
          return '='
        endif
        return '>' . (l:length - 2)
      endfunction
    endif

Add these lines to `~/.vimrc`:

    " Associate *.mdwn with markdown syntax.
    autocmd BufRead,BufNewFile *.mdwn setlocal filetype=markdown
    " Recognise bulleted lists starting with ^\*
    autocmd FileType markdown setlocal formatoptions+=n formatlistpat=^\\*\\s*
    " Interpret blockquotes as comments.
    autocmd FileType markdown setlocal comments=n:>
    " Configure folding to use the function defined earlier.
    autocmd FileType markdown setlocal foldmethod=expr foldexpr=MarkdownFolding(v:lnum)
