[Project Euler problem
59:](http://projecteuler.net/index.php?section=problems&id=59)

> Each character on a computer is assigned a unique code and the preferred
> standard is ASCII (American Standard Code for Information Interchange). For
> example, uppercase A = 65, asterisk (*) = 42, and lowercase k = 107.
>
> A modern encryption method is to take a text file, convert the bytes to ASCII,
> then XOR each byte with a given value, taken from a secret key. The advantage
> with the XOR function is that using the same encryption key on the cipher
> text, restores the plain text; for example, 65 XOR 42 = 107, then 107 XOR 42 =
> 65.
>
> For unbreakable encryption, the key is the same length as the plain text
> message, and the key is made up of random bytes. The user would keep the
> encrypted message and the encryption key in different locations, and without
> both "halves", it is impossible to decrypt the message.
>
> Unfortunately, this method is impractical for most users, so the modified
> method is to use a password as a key. If the password is shorter than the
> message, which is likely, the key is repeated cyclically throughout the
> message. The balance for this method is using a sufficiently long password key
> for security, but short enough to be memorable.
>
> Your task has been made easy, as the encryption key consists of three lower
> case characters. Using cipher1.txt (right click and 'Save Link/Target As...'),
> a file containing the encrypted ASCII codes, and the knowledge that the plain
> text must contain common English words, decrypt the message and find the sum
> of the ASCII values in the original text.

This was a frustrating problem to solve.  After thinking about it for a while I
realised that I didn't know enough about cryptography to solve it using anything
except brute-force, viz try all possible keys and perform frequency analysis on
the results.  So I decided to do some research and implement the suggestions I
found:

   1. xor the encrypted message with the encrypted message shifted by the key
   length.  (A xor X) xor (B xor X) == A xor B; this removes the key, and
   supposedly gives you a more comprehensible message.  In this case, the output
   was gibberish, so this approach wasn't useful.
   2. Perform frequency analysis before decrypting.  The [most common characters
   in English](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Most_common_letters) are e, t, a, o,
   i, and n.  (Note that the actual frequency depends on the text, but most
   English text will have a similar ordering, at least in the first few
   characters.)  I tried the following:
      1. Divide the encrypted message based on which character from the key was
      used to encrypt it.
      2. The most common character in each group is probably e, t, or a.
      Calculate the key component that decrypts the most common encrypted
      character to one of the most common plain text characters.
      3. Assemble the key and decrypt the message.  Sadly this gave me gibberish
      also.
   3. (I didn't implement this, because I don't like brute force approaches.)
   Decrypt the message using all possible key combinations, then perform
   frequency analysis on the results to decide which is the correct one.
   4. We know the message is English text containing common words, and the key
   is 3 lowercase letters.  Pick some common words and try to find them in the
   encrypted text by:
     1. xor a key-length portion of the encrypted text and the search string to
     generate a possible key.
     2. Check that all characters in the key are lowercase letters.
     3. Check that the key correctly decrypts the remaining (search string
     length - key length) characters.  If it does, we've found a possible key.

Approach 4 worked for me; reading the comments on the Project Euler thread about
problem 59, approaches 2 and 3 worked for people, so I guess I had bugs in my
attempt to implement approach 2.

One unexpected complication was that Lisp doesn't provide a method of converting
between integers and bit arrays, because those functions would be
architecture/implementation specific, and Lisp tries really hard to avoid that,
so I had to roll my own functions.  It wasn't hard, but I did waste an hour or
so trying to find standard functions.

Here's my LISP solution:

    (defun 8-bit-int-to-bit-array (int)
      "Convert an 8-bit integer into an array of bits."
      (let ((bit-array (make-array 8 :element-type 'bit))
            (remainder int))
        (dofromto (0 7 i bit-array)
          (setf (bit bit-array i) (mod remainder 2))
          (setf remainder (floor remainder 2)))))

    (defun bit-array-to-8-bit-int (bit-array)
      "Convert an array of bits into an 8-bit integer."
      (let ((int 0))
        (dofromto (7 0 i int)
          (setf int (+ (* int 2) (bit bit-array i))))))

    (defun xor-ints (int1 int2)
      "xor two ints, returning an int."
      (bit-array-to-8-bit-int (bit-xor (8-bit-int-to-bit-array int1)
                                       (8-bit-int-to-bit-array int2))))

    (defun search-for-string (encrypted-letters key-length a-string)
      "Search the list encrypted-letters for the characters in a-string."
      ; The key found by this function when a-string is " the " is correct, but
      ; that's good luck.  This should return a list of keys, then let the calling
      ; function work out which one is correct.
      (let ((haystack (coerce encrypted-letters 'array))
            (needle (map 'array #'(lambda (x) (char-code x)) a-string))
            (lowercase-letters '())
            (key (make-array key-length)))
        (dofromto ((char-code #\z) (char-code #\a) letter)
          (push letter lowercase-letters))
        (block find-key
          (dofromto (0 (1- (- (length haystack) (length needle))) index)
            (block try-at-position-n
              ; We don't need to brute-force the first key-length keys:
              ;   encrypted-letter xor expected-letter == key-letter
              ; Each key-letter must be a lowercase letter; if not, we don't have a
              ; match here, move to the next position.
              (dofromto (0 (1- key-length) offset)
                (setf (aref key offset) (xor-ints (aref haystack (+ index offset))
                                                  (aref needle offset)))
                (when (not (member (aref key offset) lowercase-letters))
                  (return-from try-at-position-n)))
              ; Now, check if the remaining characters are successfully decrypted
              ; using the key we've just built.  We need at least key-length more
              ; characters in the search string to verify the key, but we don't
              ; enforce that.
              (dofromto (key-length (1- (length needle)) offset)
                (when (not (equal (aref needle offset)
                                  (xor-ints (aref haystack (+ index offset))
                                            (aref key (mod offset key-length)))))
                  (return-from try-at-position-n)))
              ; We've found the key!
              (return-from find-key key))))))

    (defun project-euler-59-1 ()
      (let* ((encrypted-letters (read-comma-delimited-file #p"cipher1.txt"))
             (key-length 3)
             (key (search-for-string encrypted-letters key-length " the "))
             (message '()))
        (let ((index 0))
          (dolist (encrypted-letter encrypted-letters)
            (push (xor-ints (aref key index) encrypted-letter) message)
            (setf index (mod (1+ index) 3))))
        (nreverse message)
        (format t "窿ア磲疸狎＇灬礅溽ㄩ铘ㄣ镤瀛汨狎轭舂礤篌徵濠ㄡ痧禊＇礤篌徵濠┅圹◆徵躺有序镪邈暨捧戾痱镧蜥眄轭巛